So, we have seen how to explore connectivity
using breadth first search.
So, now let us look at the other strategy
which is commonly used called depth first
search.
So, in depth first search instead of exploring
all vertices level by level.
Each time we explore a new vertex, we immediately
explore its neighbors.
So, we start from vertex i and visit the first
neighbour j from i which is not yet explored.
Then we suspend the exploration of i and explore
j instead, and you keep doing this until you
can no further.
So, when you get stuck when there is nothing
new to explore you walk back, because you
have already left some vertices earlier unexplored,
because you suspended.
So, you go back to the nearest suspended vertex
that still has an unexplored neighbor, and
then you explore the next unexplored neighbor
of that vertex.
So, the way to think about it is that all
the vertices which are pending which are suspended
are now in a stack.
So, you build up the stack as you go deeper
and deeper into the graph, and then whenever
you get stuck at a dead end, you walk back
up and you process things earlier in the stack.
So, as before let us execute this algorithm
by hand on our graph, and see how it works
before we write the pseudo code.
So, this time we are starting at 4.
So, first step is to mark 4 as visited.
So, we mark 4 as visited and we identify that
it has 3 neighbours before neighbours 1, 3,
5, and 6.
So, taking them in order we start with 1;
1 is not visited.
So, we mark it as visited.
And we put 4 on the stack, saying we are suspending
the exploration of 4, because now we are going
to explore 1 instead.
So, now we go to 1, then we see that 1 has
neighbours 2, 3, and 4 among these the first
is 2.
So, we put 2 on the stack, since it was not
visited, we mark 2 as visited since it was
not visited earlier, then we put 1 on the
stack, saying now we are suspending 1.
So, now we look at the neighbours of 2.
So, neighbours of 2 are 1 and 3, 1 has already
been visited, 3 has not.
So, we will now mark 3 as visited and suspend
2.
Now when we come to 3, it has 2 neighbours
1 and 2, but both of them are already visited.
So, there is nothing to be done.
So, we must go and we must go back to the
last vertex which we suspended namely 2, and
explore its neighbours.
We go back to 2, so we had already declared
that 1 was not to be done, we have already
processed 3.
So, we have to look at 4, but 4 is also already
visited.
So, we are done with 2.
So, now we must go back and store the next
vertex on the stack which was left undone
that was 1.
Now we go back to 1, and we find that from
1 we had already visited 2, 3 which we had
not visited from 1 was visited via 2 so it
is already marked so this is done.
And 4 also is where we came from to 1.
So, this is done.
So, 1 is also useless.
So, now we go back and go back to the first
vertex we started with 4, and see if there
is something more to be done.
So, having come back to 4, we find that, it
has more neighbours, we only explored 1 the
first time.
So, now we continue we find that there are
still 5, 6, and 8.
So, we pick up 5 and see it is not visited,
we mark 5 and again suspend 4.
So, from 5, now we have 4, 6, and 7.
So, we will now pick up 6 and suspend 5.
From 6, we have 7, 5, 7, and 8; so 5 is already
done, but 7 is not done.
So, we will pick up 7 and suspend 6.
Now from 7, we find that it has neighbours
5 and 6, both of which are already marked.
So, 7 is a dead end.
So, we come back and look at 6 again, and
see if there is anything new to be done, there
is, there is an 8.
So, now we add 8, and again suspend 6.
Now we are at 8, and now we have to ask what
can be explored from 8, from 8 4 is already
done it has 4, 6, and 9.
So, 4 is already done, 6 is already done,
but 9 is new.
So, we add 9 and suspend 8, then we move to
9.
So, from 9 we find it has a new neighbour
10.
So, we add 10 and then we are done, because
10 has nothing to do.
So, we go back and process 9; 9 has no more
new things to say, because 9 the other neighbours
are 6 and 8 which are already done, we go
back to 8, 8 has nothing more to say so we
go back to 6, 6 has nothing more to say so
we go back to 5, 5 has nothing more to say
so we go back to 4, now when we started this
whole exploration you did it by 4 to 5.
So, now we look and see that 4 to 6 is already
done, not 4 to 6, 4 to 8 is already done.
So, there is nothing more we can do from 4
and so this exploration is done.
So, what we did explicitly with a stack can
be done more cleverly, if we just implement
it recursively.
So, whenever we visit a new vertex j, we call
DFS of j and suspend DFS of the current vertex
i.
So, we do not have to explicitly maintain
this stack that we were simulating, because
it will be implicitly maintained by the recursive
function calls.
So, DFS is therefore a very simple algorithm
to implement.
So, initially we say for every vertex visited
is 0, and remember like in BFS breadth first
search we want to keep track of where we came
from, so we will say that everything has an
undefined parent.
Now we initialize we call DFS of the start
vertex.
So, when we call DFS from a vertex, we mark
it as been visited.
So, the first thing we do is to mark it as
been visiting.
And now for every other vertex that it is
connected to we do the usual think, we check
whether or not that vertex is already visited;
if it is not visited, we want visit it.
So, how do we visit it, we mark its parent
as being i.
And then we suspend this DFS and call that
DFS.
So, this is what we were doing explicitly
with a stack, but it much easier to do recursively.
So, DFS is a very, very simple recursive algorithm,
starts at i look at every unexplored neighbour
and recursively invoke DFS on that unexplored
neighbor.
So, what is the complexity of depth first
search?
Well, each vertex is marked and explored exactly
once.
So, we do DFS of j, once for every j.
So, these are order n calls, actually exactly
n calls if everything is reachable.
Now when we call DFS of j for a particular
j, we need to examine all the neighbours of
j.
As we saw before if we have an adjacency matrix;
that means, we have to look at the row j,
and we have to look at every entry in this
row.
So, this takes order n time.
So, we have order n calls and each call takes
order n times.
So, over all we have order n square time.
On the other hand, if we use an adjacency
list then when we look at the neighbours of
j, we only have to look at the exact vertices
it is connected to and as we said before if
we count across all the calls each edge will
be accounted for twice; once from i to j,
and once from j to i.
So, the total numbers of calls, the total
number of steps to scan the neighbours we
will be order of the number of edges.
So, the overall time will be linear m plus
n like breadth first search.
So, both depth first search, and breadth first
search are linear in the size of the input,
if we use adjacency list.
So, one big difference between depth first
search and breadth first search is that the
paths that breadth first search discovers
are not shortest paths.
So, if we have a graph as we saw before a
triangle like this where we have 1, 2, and
3; then what depth first search will do it
will find a path from 1 to 3 which goes via
2, if we take this smallest neighbor each
time to explore.
So, when I actually come to the 1 3 path,
I will find that 3 is already visited and
I will do nothing, right.
So, it appears therefore that depth first
search may not be doing something very useful,
but actually this recursive way of exploring
gives us a lot of information.
So, many useful features about the graph can
actually be recorded by, can be extracted
by recording the order in which DFS visits
vertices.
So, for this we augment DFS with something
called numbering.
So, we maintain a counter which we increment
every time we enter a vertex, when DFS starts
in a vertex and when it leaves.
So, we associate with each vertex in the graph
2 values; the value of the counter that was
there when I entered when I did DFS of j for
the first time, and the value of the counter
when DFS of j exited.
So, this is how we would do this in our algorithm.
So, we start by initializing this counter
to 0, now whenever I invoke DFS of i, the
first thing I do is assign the current counter
value to something called the pre number of
i.
So, this is the number of the counter before
the DFS of i actually started, and then I
increment the count.
Likewise when I am about to exit, I would
mark post of i equal to count, and again I
increment the count.
So, this says that, so, in between remember
a lot of recursive calls happen.
So, this point is not going to the same as
the count with I incremented, there is going
to be a lot of stuff happening in between,
and it turns out this the order in which these
two numbers pre i and post i, if I look across
vertices I can actually recover a lot of information.
So, let us look at this example that we did
before.
So, supposing as before we start at 4.
So, we will say that its pre number is say
0, because we start there and then we increment
and then we go to 1.
So, when we enter 1, the number is the count
is 1.
So, its pre number is 1, and then we go to
2, its pre number is 2; then we go to 3, its
pre number is 3, and then we immediately leave
3, because we do not have any new neighbors
to exit.
So, its post number is now 4.
So, I am writing the pre number above and
the post number below.
When I come back to 2 and I find that there
is nothing more to be done at 2 so I exit
from 2.
So, its post number becomes 5.
So, notice that here, I enter at step 2 and
left at step 5 in between I did 3 and 4 somewhere
else.
Likewise I come back to 1, and I find that
it has nothing new to say.
So, now I leave 1 at step 6, then I come back
to 4, but I am not finished with 4, because
I can do 5.
So, I enter 5 at step 7, from 5 I enter 6
at step 8, from 6 I enter 7 at step 9, now
from 7 I cannot go anywhere else, so I leave
7 and I come back to 6, then from 6 I look
further and I find 8.
So, enter 8.
So, I was a 10 at that point.
So, now I enter 8 at step 11, from 8 I enter
9 at step 12, from 9 I enter 10 at step 13,
then I leave 10 and I leave 9 at 15, I leave
8 at 16, I leave 7 at 17, I leave 5 at 18,
and I come back to 4 and I finally finish
at 19, right.
So, I have with each, each node now these
2 values, pre value, and post value.
So, I have a pre value and a post value, and
it turns out that, this pre and post values
can be very helpful.
So, we can find out things like whether a
graph has a cycle.
So, this is a cycle.
So, whether a graph has a loop like this or
we can find out whether there are vertices
like this.
So, this is the special vertex, because if
I remove this 4 from the graph, in the graph
which was earlier connected everything could
reach everything is no longer connected.
Because, there is no way now to get from 1
2 3 to this lower thing.
So, are there such cut vertices.
So, these are various things that can be computed
using these DFS numbers, we will see some
of these computations in later lectures, but
this makes DFS actually a much more useful
exploration strategy than breadth first search
the BFS does give us shortest paths, but on
the other hand DFS gives as a wealth of information
which is implicitly hidden in this recursive
order of exploration which we can exploit
to find out various structural properties
of the graph for free more or less while we
are doing DFS, we can find out many, many
interesting things about the graph.